mgr/dashboard: add preliminary steps to documentation (#34076)
ceph/ceph: src/pybind/mgr/dashboard/HACKING.rst

.. contents:: Table of Contents

Preliminary Steps
-----------------

The following documentation chapters expect a running Ceph cluster and at
least a running `dashboard` manager module (with few exceptions). This
chapter gives an introduction on how to set up such a system for development,
without the need to set up a full blown production environment. All in this

> chapter introduced options are based on a so called `vstart` environment. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
without the need to set up a full-blown production environment. All options
introduced in this chapter are based on a so-called `vstart` environment. 
```

.. note::

  Every `vstart` environment needs Ceph `to be compiled`_ from its Github
  repository, though Docker environments simplify that step by providing a

>   shell script that contains those instructions.

Reviewer: Good point. I think it makes sense to point out both options and available solutions, in order to not discriminate one approach or the other. I think there is merit in some diversity/choice here.

>   shell script that contains those instructions.

Author: > if this is mostly meant for dashboard newcomers/interns

Indeed, it is. But for completeness, I wouldn't leave out the host option, but of course that's also not what you've asked for.

I like to hear that there's a build-free solution available and I'm glad to include it in the doc! Also thanks for directly pointing me to it, as I would have had to search for it otherwise!

>   shell script that contains those instructions.

Author: ..but can you briefly explain the benefit for development? It came to my mind that it might lack a proper Github repository. Does it has other downsides?

>   shell script that contains those instructions.

Author: Just that I'll be able to put it in correct term. I don't want to recommend a development environment which turns out not to be one, because one cannot keep track of any changes or one is unable to commit and push them. If it's just about getting the dashboard running to have a look and being able to click around, I've got to put that into the proper perspective.

>   shell script that contains those instructions.

Reviewer 2: > Just that I'll be able to put it in correct term. I don't want to recommend a development environment which turns out not to be one

@p-se the build-free solution is also a development environment, you can make changes
as all the mgr code is shared  with your local repo, so you can perfectly work with it (the only scenario where would not help is when you need to edit C++ code, as in that case you're using rpm packages).
In fact, it has been like a year without having to build in order to send PRs.

>   shell script that contains those instructions.

Reviewer 3: @alfonsomthd 
Can you share the build-free solution? Link, or guidelines. Thanks!

>   shell script that contains those instructions.

Reviewer 4: @p-se I think Alfonso already replied (thanks @alfonsomthd !).

@bk201 you can follow [these steps](https://github.com/rhcs-dashboard/ceph-dev#quick-install-rpm-based)(`ceph-dev` only). I'm sure it won't be really complicate to bring that feature into `ceph-dev-docker` too (as `ceph-dev` was originally based on `ceph-dev-docker`).

>   shell script that contains those instructions.

Author: That's quite a good selling point

.. _to be compiled: https://docs.ceph.com/docs/master/install/build-ceph/

vstart
~~~~~~

"vstart" is actually a shell script in the `src/` directory of the Ceph
repository (``src/vstart.sh``). It is used to start a single node Ceph
cluster on the machine where it is executed. Several required and some
optional Ceph internal services are started automatically when it is used to
start a Ceph cluster. `vstart` is the basis for the three most commonly used
development environments in Ceph Dashboard.

> Host vs Docker

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Host-based vs. Docker-based Development Environments
```

~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

This document introduces you to three different development environments, all
based on vstart. Those are:

- vstart running on your host system

- vstart running in a Docker environment

>   * ceph-dev-docker_ (mostly used by SUSE employees)

Reviewer 5: Suggestion: I would leave out the "mostly used by [...]" part and rather state which OS is supported by the different ceph-dev* environments.

  * ceph-dev_ (mostly used by RedHat employees)

.. note::

  Independently of which of these environments you will choose, you need to

>   compile on Ceph in that environment. If you compiled Ceph on your host

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
  compile Ceph in that environment. If you compiled Ceph on your host
```

  system, you would have to recompile it on Docker to be able to switch to a
  Docker based solution. The same is true vice versa. If you previously used
  a Docker development environment and compiled Ceph there and you now want
  to switch to your host system, you will also need to recompile Ceph (or
  compile Ceph using another separate repository).

> Development environment on your host system

Author: If it really is pollution is a question of perspective. I have the intention to (also) work on my host system and would never consider this to be polluting my host. I'd hence rather try to stay neutral here and not put it that way

> Development environment on your host system

Reviewer: Regardless, I suggest to include a remark that setting up a development environment on the host system will result in a large number of additional packages to be installed, which requires additional disk space.

> Development environment on your host system

Author: Well, it might make sense to note that additional packages need to be installed on the host system, though, I'd like to point out that the disk space of the root file system will in each case be reduced by the size of the dependencies which are required to compile Ceph, regardless of which development environment is chosen, host or container. Hence I'm inclined to put this information on neither side of the comparison, if you agree.

When I thought about this topic, it occurred to me that the disk space used by the `build/` directory after compilation might be more noteworthy. I'll find a place to mention that.

> Development environment on your host system

Reviewer 4: Big caveat of this approach is that you may need to upgrade you host OS to be able to catch up with latest Ceph build deps (it happened to me when I joined: I was running Fedora 27 and all of a sudden Ceph switched GCC to v8 so I had to migrate to Fedora 28, and that caused lot of side-effects with other tools... That led me to choose the containerized approach over the bare-metal one).

...........................................

- No need to learn or have experience with Docker, jump in right away
- Limited amount of scripts to support automation (like Ceph compilation)
- No pre-configured easy-to-start services (Prometheus, Grafana, etc)
- Limited amount of host operating systems supported, depending on which
  Ceph version is supposed to be used

> Development environment using Docker

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Development environments based on Docker/Podman
```

Author: Unless someone assures me that `Podman` really works on either environment, I'd prefer not to mention it. From my experience, the switch from `Docker` to `Podman` is nearly seamless, but not so from `docker-compose` to `podman-compose`. I do not want people to think they could use either of them, but then failing miserably by trying to use `podman-compose`, which I honestly expect not to function with our averagely complex `docker-compose.yml` files.

....................................

- Some overhead in learning Docker if you are not used to it yet.

- Both Docker projects provide you with scripts that help you getting started
  and automate recurring tasks.

- Both Docker environments come with partly pre-configured external services
  which can be used to attach to or complement Ceph Dashboard features, like

  - Prometheus
  - Grafana
  - Node-Exporter
  - Shibboleth
  - HAProxy

> Many of the Ceph Dashboard developers are SUSE employees. We therefore recommend

Reviewer 5: I would leave out line 82-83.

Reviewer: Agreed.

you to use `ceph-dev-docker`, which is based on SUSE Tumbleweed. 

vstart on your host system
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

> The vstart script is usually called from your `build/` directory like so:

Reviewer: Please note that `HACKING.rst` uses ReStructuredText, not MarkDown:
```suggestion
The vstart script is usually called from your ``build/`` directory like so:
```

Author: I did create a HTML file which I've also checked multiple times, but here seem to be differences in the rendering between what I've used locally and how Github behaves.

.. code::

  ../src/vstart.sh -n -d

In this case `-n` ensures that a new vstart cluster is created (and not the

> previously created on re-used). `-d` enables debug messages in log files.

Reviewer 5: Suggestion: "[...] and not re-using a previously created one".

There are several more options to chose from. You can get a list using the
`--help` argument.

> Once vstart is running, you will want to check if the `dashboard` manager

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Once vstart is running, you should check if the `dashboard` manager
```

module is running. This can be done by calling `./bin/ceph mgr services` to
list all the URLs of enabled services. Only URLs of services which are
available over HTTP(S) will be listed there. Ceph Dashboard is one of these
services. It should look similar to the following output:

.. code::

  $ ./bin/ceph mgr services
  {
      "dashboard": "https://home:41931/",
      "restful": "https://home:42931/"
  }

This also reveals the port on which Ceph Dashboard is running on. By default,
this environment uses a randomly chosen port for Ceph Dashboard and you need

> to use this command to find out which one it has become.

Reviewer: Actually, the output of `vstart.sh` also prints out the available dashboard URLs:
```
vstart cluster complete. Use stop.sh to stop. See out/* (e.g. 'tail -f out/????') for debug output.

dashboard urls: https://192.168.178.84:41259, https://192.168.178.84:43259, https://192.168.178.84:45259
  w/ user/pass: admin / admin
restful urls: https://192.168.178.84:42259, https://192.168.178.84:44259, https://192.168.178.84:46259
  w/ user/pass: admin / 598da51f-8cd1-4161-a970-b2944d5ad200
```

Docker
~~~~~~

Docker development environments usually ship with a lot of useful scripts.
`ceph-dev-docker` for instance contains a file called `start-ceph.sh`, which
cleans up log files, always starts a Rados Gateway service, sets some Ceph
Dashboard configuration options and automatically runs a frontend proxy, all
before or after starting up your vstart cluster.

Instructions on how to use those environments are contained in their
respective repository README files.

> `ceph-dev-docker` is mainly used by SUSE employees. `ceph-dev` is the primary

Reviewer 5: I would put this whole section right after mentioning ceph-dev and ceph-dev-docker for the first time (line 43-44).
And still +1 for leaving out the "mainly used by [...]"-part and instead only pointing out which OS is supported in which environment. :)

Reviewer: I agree, please leave out the company names here and just mention both environments and how they differ from a technology POV.

Reviewer: And FWIW, it's "Red Hat", not "RedHat" ;)

Author: > And still +1 for leaving out the "mainly used by [...]"-part and instead only pointing out which OS is supported in which environment. :)

It seems I've had that in the doc twice and only removed it once. Regarding the supported operating systems, I'd appreciate some help. For `ceph-dev-docker` it's clear to me, but for `ceph-dev` I'm unsure about the supported operating systems for different Ceph releases.

What I have so far is:

```
          ceph-dev-docker         ceph-dev
Mimic     openSUSE Leap 15        
Nautilus  openSUSE Leap 15
Octopus   openSUSE Leap 15.2
Master    openSUSE Tumbleweed
```

I also know that `ceph-dev` generally supports 
- Fedora
- CentOS 7 / RHEL 7

But not in which constellation. When we already note which operating systems are supported, I'd prefer to have it described in that detail. Can someone fill in those blanks for me? Possibly you, @epuertat ?

development environment of RedHat employees. Besides their independent
development branches and sometimes slightly different approaches, they also
differ with respect to their underlying operating systems. `ceph-dev-docker`
ships with Docker images using SUSE Linux distributions, whereas `ceph-dev`

> is shipped with RedHat Linux distributions.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
is based on Red Hat Linux distributions.
```

optional Ceph internal services are started automatically when it is used to
start a Ceph cluster. vstart is the basis for the three most commonly used
development environments in Ceph Dashboard.

You can read more about vstart in `Deploying a development cluster`_.
Additional information for developers can also be found in the `Developer
Guide`_.

.. _Deploying a development cluster: https://docs.ceph.com/docs/master/dev/dev_cluster_deployement/
.. _Developer Guide: https://docs.ceph.com/docs/master/dev/quick_guide/

Host-based vs Docker-based Development Environments
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

This document introduces you to three different development environments, all
based on vstart. Those are:

- vstart running on your host system

- vstart running in a Docker environment

  * ceph-dev-docker_
  * ceph-dev_

Besides their independent development branches and sometimes slightly
different approaches, they also differ with respect to their underlying
operating systems.

          ceph-dev-docker         ceph-dev
Mimic     openSUSE Leap 15        
Nautilus  openSUSE Leap 15
Octopus   openSUSE Leap 15.2

> Master    openSUSE Tumbleweed

Author: Thank you very much, this is exactly what I've asked for in https://github.com/ceph/ceph/pull/34076#discussion_r395881988!

> Master    openSUSE Tumbleweed

Reviewer 4: Thanks! Missed that one :sweat_smile:
